Single file apps in .net 5 (#90)
dotnet/designs: accepted/single-file/design.md

# Single-file Publish

> This document describes the design single-file apps in .net 5.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes the design single-file apps in .NET 5.0.
```

> The design of single-file apps in .net core 3.0 can be found [here](3.0/bundler.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The design of single-file apps in .NET Core 3.0 can be found [here](3.0/bundler.md)
```

## Introduction

The goal of this effort is enable .Net-Core apps to be published and distributed as a single executable.

There are several strategies to implement this feature -- ranging from bundling the published files into zip file to native compiling and linking all the binaries together. These options, along with their cost/benefit analysis is discussed in the [staging document](staging.md) and [related work](related.md).

#### Goals

> In .Net Core 5.0, we plan to implement a solution that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET 5.0, we plan to implement a solution that:
```

> * Is widely compatible: Apps containing MSIL assemblies, ready-to-run assemblies, composite assemblies, native binaries, configuration files, etc. can be packaged into one executable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Is widely compatible: Apps containing CIL assemblies, ready-to-run assemblies, composite assemblies, native binaries, configuration files, etc. can be packaged into one executable.
```

  * An earlier framework, causes a compilation error.

Setting the `PublishSingleFile` property causes the managed app, runtime configuration files (`app.deps.json`, `app.runtimeconfig.json`), and managed binary dependencies to be embedded within the native `apphost`.  All managed binaries (IL and ready-to-run files) that would be written to the publish directory and any sub-directories are bundled with the apphost.

All other files, including platform-specific native binaries and symbol files, are left alongside the app by default. However, the set of files left unbundled alongside the app is expected to be small, such as: data-files (ex: `appsettings.json`) and custom native binary dependencies of the application. Further details regarding the files left next to the app is discussed in the [Host build](#Host-Builds) section. 

### Optional Settings

| Property                        | Behavior when set to `true`                                  |
| ------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `IncludeContentInSingleFile`    | All published files (except symbol files) are embedded within the single-file bundle. |

> | `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile`    | The symbol files (IL `.pdb` file, and the native `.ni.pdb` / `app.guid.map` files generated by ready-to-run compiler) are embedded within the symbol file. |

Reviewer 2: This option is going to be useful only in combination with ExtractContentsFromSingleFile. Is that correct?

Or are we going to fix all tools that consume .ni.pdb, .map files, etc. to deal with them when they are embedded? It would be pretty hard to do, I think.

Author: Yes, the symbols are only useful when extracted. 

Similarly `IncludeContentInSingleFile` is only useful with `ExtractContentsFromSingleFile` unless they are read through the new APIs that were proposed. 

So, I have simplified the publish properties to remove `ExtractContentsFromSingleFile` option. Instead `IncludeContentInSingleFile` and `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile` will imply extraction.

Reviewer 2: > Yes, the symbols are only useful when extracted.

That is true for unmanaged symbols (.ni.dll/.map). For managed symbols, we can do the work to map them from the bundle for the stacktraces. Or we can just tell people to use .pdbs embedded into IL image if they want to have .pdbs for the single file apps (ie no special work required for single file).

For the unmanaged symbols, I suspect that there would be number of other changes required. For example, .map files contain absolute file offset, so you would need to rewrite them as part of the embedding.

Similar on Windows, the sampling profilers depend on the file to be mapped as proper Windows module. So to make them work, I believe you would need to merge all R2R .PDBs into one that matches the single-file module - or something like that.

I think this paragraph about symbols needs to have customer scenarios: What is and is not going to work, and why it is important. Right now it just talks about implementation details that is not good enough.

BTW: I am not convinced that we need to be embedding and extracting the unmanaged symbols (.map/.ni.pdbs). The scenarios for it sounds pretty marginal. However, we should make sure that the unmanaged symbols are still usable after embeding - that is the important part.

Author: I spoke with @mikem8361  about this. 

Mike said that the the `.map` files store physical offsets that are interpretted wrt the module load. Today, R2R assemblies are loaded on Linux via mapping the files and adjusting offsets -- the `.map` files are expected to work correctly in this case. For single-file apps, R2R assemblies will again be loaded via MappedImageLayout (albeit after mapping from a different offset within the single-file bundle). So, the `.map` files are expected to work OK.

Mike also said that the Windows profiler should be able to handle the `.ni.pdb` files without the need to merge them into one. But I don't know much details about the profiler.

I agree that embedding symbol files within the bundle is not an important use case. `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile` was provided in .net core 3 based on request by a few customers -- so I carried forward the option. But nobody has asked for embedding the `.ni.pdb`/ `.map` files yet.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for doing the homework on this. 

- `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile` option is provided for compatibility with .NET 3 single-file mode. It extract files to disk.
- Embedded portable PDBs are the solution for proper no-extract-to-disk single file. This should work today already.
- Unless we hear somebody asking for it with a good backing scenario, we will not do anything for embedding the .ni.pdb/ .map files

> | `ExtractContentsFromSingleFile` | The files that cannot be processed directly from the bundle are extracted out to disk at startup. |

Author: https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/90#discussion_r375654947

When including all content in single files, certain files can be explicitly excluded from being embedded in the single-file by setting following `ExcludeFromSingleFile` meta-data element. For example, to place some files in the publish directory but not bundle them in the single-file:

```xml
<PropertyGroup>
  <PublishSingleFile>true</PublishSingleFile>
  <IncludeContentInSingleFile>true</IncludeContentInSingleFile>
  <ExtractContentsFromSingleFile>true</ExtractContentsFromSingleFile>
</PropertyGroup> 
<ItemGroup>
  <Content Update="*.xml">
    <CopyToPublishDirectory>PreserveNewest</CopyToPublishDirectory>
      <ExcludeFromSingleFile>true</ExcludeFromSingleFile>
  </Content>
</ItemGroup>
```

### Alternatives

The behavior of `PublishSingleFile` property described above, is significantly different from `.net core 3.x` SDK. As an alternative, we could leave `PublishSingleFile` semantics unchanged (bundle all content to an actual single file), and have a different property `PublishFewFiles` to only bundle content that can be directly processed from the single-file.

### Interaction with External Tools

> Once the single-file-publish tooling is added to the publish pipeline, other static binary transformation tools may need to adapt its presence. For example, tools like [Fody](https://github.com/Fody/Fody) that use  `AfterBuild`/`AfterPublish` targets may need to adapt to expect the significantly different output generated by publishing to a single file. The goal in this case is to provide sufficient documentation and guidance.

Author: Yes, the work is provide documentation for [dotnet publish](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/tools/dotnet-publish?tabs=netcore21) page, once the documentation for 3.x is live.

## The Bundler

The bundler is a tool that embeds the managed app and its dependencies into the native `AppHost` executable. The functional details of the bundler are explained in [this document](bundler.md). 

## The Host

### Startup

On Startup, the [host components](https://github.com/dotnet/core-setup/blob/master/Documentation/design-docs/host-components.md) perform the following functions:

* **AppHost**: The AppHost identifies itself as a single-file bundle (by checking the [bundle marker](bundler.md#bundle-marker)) before invoking [HostFxr](https://github.com/dotnet/core-setup/blob/master/Documentation/design-docs/host-components.md#host-fxr).

* **HostFxr**: If invoked from a single-file app, HostFxr process the `runtimeconfig.json` and `deps.json` files directly from the bundle. The location of these `json` files  are identified directly from the bundle-header for simple access.

* **HostPolicy**: Much of the bundle-processing is performed within HostPolicy.
  
  * If the app needs extraction, extracts out the appropriate files as explained in [this document](extractor.md).
  

>   * Reads the `deps.json` file directly from the bundle and resolves dependencies.

Author: The HostPolicy probing can continue as if the contents of the bundle were available alongside the app (using `bundle_probe` instead of file probing. I did not elaborate on this yet, since `deps.json` probing itself is still under discussion. But I agree that this requires more explanation.

  
  * Processes the Bundle manifest to maintain internal data-structures to locate bundled assemblies when probed by the runtime.
  
  * Implements a bundle-probe function, which will be used by the runtime to probe contents of the bundle when resolving assemblies. 
  
    * Bundle probe has the following signature:
  
      ```C++
      /// <summary>
      /// <param name="path"> Relative-path to the file being probed. </param>
      /// <param name="size"> Out-param: size of the file, if found. </param>
      /// <param name="path"> Out-param: offset within the bundle, if found</param>
      /// <returns> true if the requested file is found in the bundle, 
      ///           false otherwise. </returns>
      /// </summary>
      bool bundle_probe(const char *path, int64_t *size, int64_t *offset);
      ```
  
    * The `bundle_probe` function pointer is passed to the runtime (encoded as a string) through a property named `BUNDLE_PROBE`.
  
    * The contents of the bundle are not included in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`. Any additional assemblies on disk (ex: due to `additional-deps` /`AdditionalProbingPaths`) are included in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`.

>   

Reviewer 2: > "Tricks" for the few native dlls from CoreFX which will be bundled directly

We should get these linked into coreclr.dll to avoid need for these tricks. We are doing that for System.Globalization.Native already - https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/6928

>   

Author: The extraction directory (if any) will be added to `NATIVE_DLL_SEARCH_DIRECTORIES`.

`PLATFORM_RESOURCE_ROOTS` is treated similar to `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` -- the runtime probes the satellite assemblies in the bundle before looking elsewhere. I'll update the notes about it.

>   

Reviewer 3: By "tricks" I meant changes we made in the prototype so that `[DllImport("clrcompression.dll")]` continues to work even when `clrcompression.dll` is statically linked with the host. I don't think that will just magically work.
Another consideration is that `hostpolicy` is not aware of these changes, so maybe we will need to make it aware (so that it doesn't put a relative path to the `NATIVE_DLL_SEARCH_DIRECTORIES` as that may actually cause potential security issues).

* `coreclr.dll`(runtime), `clrjit.dll` (JIT compiler), and `clrcompression.dll` (native counterpart of BCL for certain compression algorithms).
    * It may be possible to link these DLLs together as CoreCLR.dll, but this work is not prioritized, in deference to building the full super-host once debugging framework supports it.
* mscordaccore.dll (to enable Watson dumps)

Certain additional binaries may be optionally included with the app to enable debugging scenarios. 
The work to not require these binaries as separate files on disk alongside the app is ongoing.

* For F5 debugging on VS and VS-Core: `mscordbi.dll`, `libmscordbi.so`
* For Linux mini-dumps: `createdump`, `libmscordaccore.so` 
* For ETW / LTTng: `clretwrc.dll`, `libcoreclrtraceptprovider.so` 
* For exception stack trace source information, error string resources on Windows: `Microsoft.DiaSymReader.Native.amd64.dll`, `mscorrc.debug.dll`, `mscorrc.dll`

When targeting `win7` platform, several additional DLLs are necessary (`api-*.dll`) to handle API compatibility. These files must be alongside the AppHost for the app to even start execution.

> Therefore, we propose that targeting `win7-*` should not be supported when publishing apps as a single-file.

Reviewer 4: @richlander - What is the decision for Win7?

> Therefore, we propose that targeting `win7-*` should not be supported when publishing apps as a single-file.

Author: @samsp-msft  @richlander To state the constraint more explicitly, if we do support win7 targets, then the self-contained single-file publish for hello-world console app will be 47 files, instead of 224 files. These files cannot be bundled within the app and later extracted. Please see: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/13356#issuecomment-530595570

> Therefore, we propose that targeting `win7-*` should not be supported when publishing apps as a single-file.

Reviewer 3: I'm pretty sure we should be able to build the apphost as a Win7 compatible executable without the additional dlls (after all Win10 can run Win7 exes just fine). The question is if that has other side effects - like increasing the size of the apphost, or turning on compatibility shims on Win10 and so on. In the extreme we could have a Win7 specific apphost.

## The Runtime

### Dependency Resolution

In order to resolve assemblies, the embedded resources are probed first, followed by other probing paths encoded in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`. 

### PEImage loader

* IL assemblies are loaded directly from the bundle.
    * The portion of the single-file bundle containing the required assembly is memory mapped, and the contents are appropriately interpreted by the runtime.

* ReadyToRun Assemblies
    * On Linux, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded directly from bundle. The various sections in the PE file are mapped at appropriate addresses, and offsets are fixed up.
    * On MAC, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded similar to Linux. However, Mojave hardened runtime doesn't allow executable mappings of a file. Therefore, the contents of an assembly are read from the bundle into pre-allocated executable memory.

>     * On Windows, due to certain limitations in memory mapping routines described below, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded by memory mapping the file and copying sections to appropriate offsets.

Reviewer 2: Note that we can do better here by laying out the sections in the file such that this copying is not necessary.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I see you are covering this below.

* ReadyToRun [Composite](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/design/features/readytorun-composite-format-design.md) Assemblies are expected to be loaded similar to ReadyToRun assemblies. 

#### Windows Limitations
The Windows mapping routines have the following limitations:
* [CreateFileMapping](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/winbase/nf-winbase-createfilemappinga) has no option to create a mapping for a part of the file (no offset argument).
    This means that:
    * We cannot use the (SEC_IMAGE) attribute to perform automatic section-wise loading (circumventing alignment requirements) of bundled assemblies directly.
    * Instead we need to map each section independently.
* [MapViewOfFile]( https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/memoryapi/nf-memoryapi-mapviewoffileex) can only map parts of a file aligned at [memory allocation granularity]( https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/sysinfoapi/ns-sysinfoapi-system_info), which is 64KB.
    This means that:
    * Each section within the assemblies should be aligned at 64KB – which is not guaranteed by the crossgen compiler.

>     * In order to memory-map one embedded assembly at a time, the assemblies in the bundle must be aligned at 64KB boundaries.

Reviewer 2: The runtime can be fixed to handle assemblies that do not start at 64kB boundaries.

Reviewer 4: I am assuming that if we don't change the runtime, the binary size would be bloated by padding up to the 64k boundary for each assembly in the app/framework? 
That would run counter to the idea to be able to create smaller single-file apps.

Author: > The runtime can be fixed to handle assemblies that do not start at 64kB boundaries.

Yes, I agree that the runtime can round-down to a 64KB boundary, and read the headers from an appropriate offset. But after the headers are processed, the individual sections themselves need to be 64 KB aligned. So, it is probably sufficient to state the limitation about section alignment.

Author: > I am assuming that if we don't change the runtime, the binary size would be bloated by padding up to the 64k boundary for each assembly in the app/framework?
> That would run counter to the idea to be able to create smaller single-file apps.

The current proposal doesn't involve 64KB alignment, but an extra copy step at run-time. 

The 64 KB section alignment is a Windows limitation. So the suggested mitigation (likely as a subsequent step) is to use a composite R2R with aligned sections.

Reviewer 2: > But after the headers are processed, the individual sections themselves need to be 64 KB aligned.

They do not need to be. We have full control over the embedded binary format. We do not have to embed the exact copy of the PE file:
- We can reformat the sections as we embed them, so that we can map the whole file into memory at once, and just flip the permissions on pages as necessary.
- Also, for IL-only (ie no R2R), the runtime can use the flat mapping (we do that on Unix).

Reviewer 2: In other words, this is not a fundamental limitation. This is limited by the amount of effort we can afford to put into this.

        * A prototype bundler with this behavior for testing purposes is available in this branch: https://github.com/swaroop-sridhar/core-setup/tree/single-exe

We therefore map the assembly and perform an in-memory copy of the sections to appropriate offsets. In the long term, the solution to the mapping problem would involve considerations such as:
* Compile all assemblies in a version bubble into one PE assembly, with a few aligned sections.
* Embed the big composite assembly into the host with proper alignment, so that the single-exe bundle can be loaded without copies at run time.

### API Semantics

#### `Assembly.Location`

There are a few options to consider for the `Assembly.Location` property of a bundled assembly:

* A fixed literal (ex: `null`) indicating that no actual location is available.
* The simple name of the assembly (with no path).
* The path of the assembly as if it were not to be packaged into the single-file.
* A special UNC notation such as `<bundle-path>/:/asm.dll` to denote files that come from the bundle. 
* A configurable selection of the above, etc.

> Proposed solution is: `:/<bundle-sub-path>/asm.dll`, where the `:` denotes the location within the bundle. The `:` is not a valid character in file-names on Windows. The `:` is already used as a path-separator on Unix systems.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure whether this is a good idea. We are inventing a new custom path format here. People will pass this path to `File.Exist` or `File.Open` half of the time, and the app is still going to be broken. I do not think we will want to quirk all file I/O APIs to deal with this. 

The most appropriate value value to return from `Assembly.Location` is null.

Reviewer 5: What about `Assembly.CodeBase`?

Reviewer 6: `null` is a valid/documented return value of `Assembly.Location`, but pointing at the documentation and telling people that the NuGet package they're using has a bug because it doesn't check for `null` never helped much. Most apps don't check for the null, and returning null means that most apps will hit a `NullReferenceException` somewhere. People don't know how to deal with that when that exception happens in a NuGet package they don't have source code for. We have plenty of issues like that in the dotnet/corert repo (which already has this problem because it chose `null`).

Returning a custom path has the same problem - `Assembly.Location` is typically passed to the Path APIs because people either want the file part or the directory part. Most uses I've seen want the directory part because e.g. they're trying to scan for plugins or find a config file. `Directory.GetFiles(Path.Combine(Path.GetDirectoryName(asm.Location), "*"))` results in an exception that is similarly unhelpful to a `NullReferenceException`.

I'm wondering whether the best course of action would be to just make this throw with a message that has an fwlink to useful guidance. There can be AppContext switches documented at the fwlink that override the throw with a quirk to make the NuGet package work (return a fake location that combines AppContext.BaseDirectory with the module name, or return null).

`Assembly.CodeBase` is getting obsoleted in .NET 5 (see dotnet/runtime#31127). The appropriate behavior would be to throw.

Reviewer 2: We have trained people to handle Assembly.Location returning null gracefully for last 5 years, and number of NuGet packages made the required fixes already. I do not think getting everybody to change again is a good idea.

There are number of other APIs that are problematic for this mode. We plan to deal with these using analyzer that will warn about the use of these problematic APIs.

Reviewer 7: > We plan to deal with these using analyzer that will warn about the use of these problematic APIs.

@jkotas, mind adding details to https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/30740?  @terrajobst is currently using that to seed our plans for what we're actually going to ship in the release.

Reviewer 2: @sbomer @MichalStrehovsky and @vitek-karas are working on this. The current thinking is to have it in the same ILLinker-bases analyzer that detects problematic reflection APIs, etc. #30740 is about Roslyn-based analyzers.

Reviewer 8: > The current thinking is to have it in the same ILLinker-bases analyzer that detects problematic reflection APIs, etc. [dotnet/runtime#30740](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/30740) is about Roslyn-based analyzers.

Are you saying that the detection will be part of the linker? While that might make sense for code sharing, it's not necessarily a great developer experience b/c Roslyn-based analyzers are running while editing and thus are providing rapid feedback. In cases where there are alternatives we might want to provide a code fixer, which will force some of the detection logic to be part of the IDE experience anyways.

Author: I was debating between null and UNC options: 

Establishing a path-like location for the the bundle contents is useful if the app explicitly wants to use `Assembly.LoadFrom()` on one of the bundled assemblies. Otherwise, `Assembly.LoadFrom()` will always be understood to load from the disk, which is one way to define the semantics.

The path notation is also useful to address content (ex: data files) bundled in the app directly. However, if we only support accessing content through extraction, or as PE resources, this use-case is not a motivation for UNC-like paths.

I'll change the semantics to return `null`.

Most of the app development can be agnostic to whether the app is published as single-file or not. However, the parts of the app that deal with physical locations of files need to be aware of the single-file packaging. 

#### `AppContext.BaseDirectory`

> `AppContext.BaseDirectory` will be the directory where the AppHost (the single-file bundle itself) resides.

Reviewer 2: Are we going to change this even for the self-extractor case, or is that one going to stay as is?

Author: There's currently no "self-extractor" option in .Net 5.
For netcoreapp3.x single file apps, the AppContext.BaseDirectory will still be the extraction directory, as noted in design_3_0.md [here](https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/90/files#diff-0472c74f7177d370f0ad8dbdbee2773aR93).

## Handling Content 

> The app may want to access certain embedded content for reading, rather than loading via host/runtime. For example: bundled payload/data files. In this case, the recommended strategy is to embed the content files within appropriate managed assemblies as PE resources, and access them through [resource handling APIs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.reflection.assembly.getmanifestresourceinfo?view=netcore-3.1). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The app may want to access certain embedded content for reading, rather than loading via host/runtime. For example: bundled payload/data files. In this case, the recommended strategy is to embed the content files within appropriate managed assemblies as resources, and access them through [resource handling APIs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.reflection.assembly.getmanifestresourceinfo?view=netcore-3.1). 
```

However, explicit access to the embedded files is useful in situations such as: 

> - Reading data-files from the app's native code

Reviewer 2: Why is this not handled by GetManifestResourceStream ?

Author: I agree that the content in resources can be accessed by native code (ex: the managed code can share it on platforms where Win32 resource handling APIs are not available).

> - Open an assembly for reflection/inspection

Reviewer 2: There is an existing `AssemblyExtensions.TryGetRawMetadata` API for this.

Author: `AssemblyExtensions.TryGetRawMetadata()` retrieves the meta-data for loaded assemblies, right? How about inspecting the assembly before loading?

Reviewer 2: If you want to build a custom loader, attach the assemblies as managed resources.

Author: I was thinking of the case where there's an assembly in the app that's loaded through usual means in one context (say through TPA in default context) but needs to be inspected before loading into another context. All of this is achievable if the user can implement it themselves (ex: by overloading ALC.Load()) but is easier if they don't have to. 
Anyway, I don't yet know of an app that falls into this use-case, so will not push on it.

> Therefore, we propose adding an API similar to [GetManifestResourceStream](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.reflection.assembly.getmanifestresourcestream?view=netcore-3.1) to obtain a stream corresponding to an embedded file. This is only a draft of the proposed APIs. The actual shape of the APIs will be decided via API review process.

Reviewer 2: This APIs need more crisp scenarios. I do not see what this is for.

Reviewer 4: KISS - keep it simple until we have a really good reason for needing new APIs.

Author: My thinking was that not requiring the content to be embedded within PE files will lead to easier adaptation, because existing applications need fewer changes. Also, the way apps are built in the non-single-file case need not change at all. 

But I agree that we can seek feedback from customers without them in previews, so I've removed the new APIs.

Author: Other than the content accessing APIs, I think the `IsBundle()` API (which tells whether the app is run from a single-file or not) is worth including. 

In general, apps should be agnostic to how they are published (single-file or many files). However, having the `IsBundle()` test helps customer work around situations where the single-file functionality may be missing.

Several customers have asked for this `IsBundle()` test in .net core 3.x. We've resisted from offering this API in 3.x, instead offering solutions/work-arounds for the specific customer situations -- sometimes not completely successfully. 

For example, in 3.x `AppContext.BaseDirectory` points to the extraction directory. We have given other options to locate the AppHost (ex: `Process.GetCurrentProcess().MainModule.FileName`). This works in the single-file scenario, but not if the app is run through `dotnet run` in a non-single-file publish. 

This specific situation of `AppContext.BaseDirectory` will be resolved in 5.0, but having a bundle-differentiator will likely give a chance for customers to circumvent other shortcomings until the resolved.

Reviewer 2: > IsBundle() API

The problem with such API is that it is unclear what is the set of behaviors that it returns true for. I do not think we would be able to provide a good guidance for what to use it for, and maintain compatibility for how this API gets used as we evolve the runtime.

Author: My understanding of `IsBundle()` API was that it returns `true` if the host contains a bundle-header.

```cs
namespace System.Runtime.Loader
{
    public partial class Bundle
    {
        // Check whether an app is running from a single-file bundle
        public static bool IsBundle();
    }
}
```
The semantics, and the form of this API may need to evolve, along with the runtime. 
For example:
* If we have CoreRT style single-file apps, whether `IsBundle()` returns `true`? 
* If we support single-file plugins, whether we should have ``IsBundle(assembly)` ?

Reviewer 2: > IsBundle() API was that it returns true if the host contains a bundle-header.

Given https://github.com/dotnet/designs/pull/90#discussion_r375217478 , we may end up with bundle-header for every app in .NET 5 and so it would return true all the time based on this spec.

The APIs needs to be described in terms of what people should use them for, not in terms of how they are implemented.

> 

Reviewer 2: The one API that I think would make sense to add is an API that returns launching .exe path. It is clearly defined what it does and you can do that today using System.Diagnostics.Process, but it is show and comes with a lot of unnecessary dependencies. Some discussion on this is in https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/3704 .

Author: For single-exe in .net 5, the AppContext.BaseDirectory will point to the launching EXE path.
The launching EXE will be the app.exe within this directory.

However, there are other scenarios for launching the app (ex: dotnet run) where the launching EXE is not in the same directory as the app. So, is your recommendation to find the launching EXE in these cases?

Reviewer 2: > AppContext.BaseDirectory will point to the launching EXE path

It sounds good to me.

> So, is your recommendation to find the launching EXE in these cases?

It depends what you need the launching .exe for. For example, if you would like to relaunch the app under different credentials or with extra command line arguments, you do want to use the path to dotnet.exe in your example.

  * Apps with content explicitly annotated for inclusion/exclusion in the single-file bundle
  * MSIL files with embedded PDBs 
  * PDBs included/excluded from bundle
* Tests for ensure that every app model template supported by .NET Core can be published as a single file.
* Tests to ensure cross-platform publishing of single-file bundles.
* Manual end-to-end testing on real world apps

#### Measurements

Measure publish size and startup time for a few real-world apps.

#### Telemetry

Collect telemetry for single-file published apps with respect to parameters such as:

* Framework-dependent vs self-contained apps.
* Whether the apps are Pure managed apps, ready-to run compiled apps, or have native dependencies.
* Embedding of additional/data files.

## Further Work

* **Compression**: Currently the bundler does not compress the contents embedded at the end of the host binary.  Compressing the bundled files and meta-data can significantly reduce the size of the single-file output (by about 30%-50% as determined by prototyping). 
* **Single-file Plugins** Extended the above design to seamlessly support single-file publish for plugins.

> ## User Experience

Reviewer 2: I think it should be at the start of the doc. The start of the doc should explain what we are building. The implementation details should be after that.

Author: OK I'll change that, thanks

To summarize, here's the overall experience for creating a HelloWorld single-file app:

* Create a new HelloWorld app: `HelloWorld$ dotnet new console`

* Framework Dependent Publish

  * Normal publish: `dotnet publish` 

>     * Published files: `HelloWorld.exe`, `HelloWorld.dll`, `HelloWorld.deps.json`, `HelloWorld.runtimeconfig.json`, `HelloWorld.pdb`

Reviewer 2: BTW: There is a proposal from @richlander to get rid of `HelloWorld.deps.json` and to embed `HelloWorld.runtimeconfig.json` by default.

Reviewer 3: We probably can't drop `.deps.json` in all cases (Framework assembly overrides for example). And we're discussing that ideally the "embedding" would be the same technology for single-file and non-single-file.

Author: Also, `,deps.json` file is used for assembly resolution when loading plugins.

>   * Single-file publish: `dotnet publish -r win10-x64 --self-contained=false /p:PublishSingleFile=true`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Single-file publish: `dotnet publish -r win-x64 --self-contained=false /p:PublishSingleFile=true`
```
Nit: I think we should be encouraging version-less RIDs in our examples.

    * Published files: `HelloWorld.exe`, `HelloWorld.pdb`

* Self-Contained Publish

  * Normal publish: `dotnet publish -r win10-x64`
      * Published files: `HelloWorld.exe`, `HelloWorld.pdb`, and 224 more files 
  * Single-file publish Linux: `dotnet publish -r linux-x64 /p:PublishSingleFile=true`
      * Published files: `HelloWorld.exe`, `HelloWorld.pdb`
  * Single-file publish Windows: `dotnet publish -r win10-x64 /p:PublishSingleFile=true`
      * Published files: `HelloWorld.exe`, `HelloWorld.pdb`, `coreclr.dll`, `clrjit.dll`, `clrcompression.dll`,  `mscordaccore.dll`

>   * Single-file publish Windows with Extraction: `dotnet publish -r win10-x64 /p:PublishSingleFile=true /p:IncludeContentInSingleFile=true /p:ExtractContentsFromSingleFile=true`

Reviewer 2: Are we going to also keep the publish with Extractions for Unix?

Reviewer 2: If we are dropping it, we should explain why.

Author: The option to `ExtractContentsFromSingleFile` is available for Unix too, mainly for user's own native binaries that may be included with the app. I did not include it here, because it doesn't apply to HelloWorld app.

  * `netcoreapp3.0`  or `netcoreapp3.1` single-file publish works as described [here](design_3_0.md).
  * An earlier framework, causes a compilation error.

Setting the `PublishSingleFile` property causes the managed app, runtime configuration files (`app.deps.json`, `app.runtimeconfig.json`), and managed binary dependencies to be embedded within the native `apphost`.  All managed binaries (IL and ready-to-run files) that would be written to the publish directory and any sub-directories are bundled with the apphost.

All other files, including platform-specific native binaries and symbol files, are left alongside the app by default. However, the set of files left unbundled alongside the app is expected to be small, such as: data-files (ex: `appsettings.json`) and custom native binary dependencies of the application. Further details regarding the files left next to the app is discussed in the [Host build](#Host-Builds) section. 

### Optional Settings

| Property                     | Behavior when set to `true`                                  |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ |

> | `IncludeContentInSingleFile` | All published files (except symbol files) are embedded within the single-file bundle. The files that cannot be processed directly from the bundle are extracted out to disk at startup. |

Reviewer 2: How do people find where these files are extracted to with the changed meaning of `AppContext.BaseDirectory` property?

Author: In my proposal I originally had a new API `GetContentRoot()` API for locating the base directory of extracted files:

```cs
namespace System.Runtime.Loader
{
    public partial class Bundle
    {
        // Check whether an app is running from a single-file bundle
        public static bool IsBundle();
        
        // Get the location where contents of the bundle are extracted, if any
        public static string GetContentRoot();
    }
}
```

However, a different viewpoint is that the extraction is somewhat an implementation detail, and the app should not learn about it. That is, the contents of the extracted directory should be accessed via internal mechanisms, For example,  native library loads through PInvoke or `NativeLibrary.Load()` API search through known paths `NATIVE_DLL_SEARCH_DIRECTORIES`.

Reviewer 2: I would be fine with limiting the extraction to the unmanaged .dlls that cannot be embedded. In that case,  it may better to use more specific name for this, e.g. `IncludeNativeLibrariesInSingleFile`.

    This means that each section within the assemblies should be aligned at 64KB – which is not guaranteed by the crossgen compiler.

We therefore map the assembly and perform an in-memory copy of the sections to appropriate offsets. In the long term, the solution to the mapping problem would involve considerations such as:
* Compile all assemblies in a version bubble into one PE assembly, with a few aligned sections.
* Embed the big composite assembly into the host with proper alignment, so that the single-exe bundle can be loaded without copies at run time.

### API Semantics

#### `Assembly.Location`

There are a few options to consider for the `Assembly.Location` property of a bundled assembly:

* A fixed literal (ex: `null`) indicating that no actual location is available.
* The simple name of the assembly (with no path).
* The path of the assembly as if it were not to be packaged into the single-file.
* A special UNC notation such as `<bundle-path>/:/asm.dll` to denote files that come from the bundle. 
* A configurable selection of the above, etc.

> Proposed solution is for `Assembly.Location` to return `null` for bundled assemblies, which is the default behavior for assemblies loaded from memory.

Reviewer 6: I believe this should actually be an empty string, not null, as per the [docs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.reflection.assembly.location?view=netframework-4.8) (I came back to this while helping .NET Native customer with yet another issue caused by this).

Author: Thanks @MichalStrehovsky, I'll fix this.

All other files, including platform-specific native binaries and symbol files, are left alongside the app by default. However, the set of files left unbundled alongside the app is expected to be small, such as: data-files (ex: `appsettings.json`) and custom native binary dependencies of the application. Further details regarding the files left next to the app is discussed in the [Host build](#Host-Builds) section. 

### Optional Settings

The following settings can be used to package additional files into the single-file app. However, when using these options, the files that cannot be processed directly from the bundle will be extracted out to disk during startup. 

| Property                             | Behavior when set to `true`                                  |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `IncludeNativeLibrariesInSingleFile` | Bundle published native binaries into the single-file app.   |
| `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile`         | Bundle symbol files (IL `.pdb` file, and the native `.ni.pdb` / `app.guid.map` files generated by ready-to-run compiler) into the single file app. |

> | `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile`      | Bundle all published files (except symbol files) into single-file app. This option is proposed to replicate the  .NET Core 3.x version of single-file apps. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile`      | Bundle all published files (except symbol files) into single-file app. This option provides backward compatibility with the  .NET Core 3.x version of single-file apps. |
```

  
  * Implements a bundle-probe function, which will be used by the runtime to probe contents of the bundle when resolving assemblies. 
  
    ```C++
    /// <summary>
    /// <param name="path"> Relative-path to the file being probed. </param>
    /// <param name="size"> Out-param: size of the file, if found. </param>
    /// <param name="path"> Out-param: offset within the bundle, if found</param>
    /// <returns> true if the requested file is found in the bundle, 
    ///           false otherwise. </returns>
    /// </summary>
    bool bundle_probe(const char *path, int64_t *size, int64_t *offset);
    ```
    
  * The `bundle_probe` function pointer is passed to the runtime (encoded as a string) through a property named `BUNDLE_PROBE`.
  
  * When probing for assemblies, the [host probing logic](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/design/features/host-probing.md#probing-paths) will treat bundled assemblies similar to assemblies in the app directory. The probe ordering will be in the order:  servicing location, the *single-file bundle*, app directory, framework directory(s) from higher to lower, shared store, additional specified probing paths.
  

>   * The assemblies on disk are listed in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` using absolute paths. As a distinguishing convention, the assemblies to be loaded from the single-file bundle will be listed in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` using relative paths (as noted in the [bundle meta-data](bundler.md#Bundle-Transformation)). 

Reviewer 2: The alternative option would be to just use the probing function, and not include embedded assemblies at all.

Why is it a good idea to include the embedded assemblies on `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`? Do we expect that it will make more things "work"?

Note that `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` list is used by code out there, and the code generally expect the paths to be actual file paths. One example from many: https://github.com/genesisdotnet/genesis/blob/master/src/Genesis/GenesisGlobals.cs + https://github.com/genesisdotnet/genesis/blob/8cb94f1fe2242bd9bb6c7ebdee4178ad35d7de99/src/Executors/Input/Genesis.Input.SwaggerUrl/SwaggerUrlReader.cs#L282

Reviewer 3: I don't have a good reason to go either way. Your argument about code expecting to find the assemblies in the TPA can also be used to say that not including them at all is a problem as well. It's kind of a toss up what's worse, having "Wrong" file paths, or not having the files at all. I guess it depends on the app what effect that will have.

Given that the bundle stores a directory tree with files in it, it's in theory possible for the runtime to need to know where to look for the assembly in question. That would have to be provided by the hostpolicy (as a result of processing .deps.json). That said, I can't think of a case where this would actually happen though - managed assemblies should basically always remain in the "root', except for satellites which follow their own layout.

I searched github a bit and using the TPA as source of file paths (which are actually used as file paths) is by far the most common case. I found dozens of cases like that and only one where TPA was used just to list assembly names. Also, Roslyn actually has code in it which uses TPA to get file paths: 
https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/e704ca635bd6de70a0250e34c4567c7a28fa9f6d/src/Scripting/Core/Hosting/Resolvers/RuntimeMetadataReferenceResolver.cs#L186

Given this I tend to agree that we should probably not list the bundle assemblies in TPA at all. It will still break these apps, but at least it will break them consistently. Returning relative paths (most likely just `Assembly.dll` without any directory) has a higher chance of accidentally working, but with the wrong file being loaded.

We should also track work to add detection of this pattern into the linker analyzer - basically `AppContext.GetData("TRUSTED_PLATOFRM_ASSEMBLIES")` should always be marked as potentially dangerous for single-file scenarios.

Author: In light of the discussion above, I was about to change the look up mechanism to:
•	The Host doesn’t include bundled assemblies in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` 
•	The runtime probes `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`  first (so that servicing locations get priority), and then probes the bundle.

However, for satellite assemblies (assuming that we want to leave them servicible), the `PLATFORM_RESOURCE_ROOTS` are a set of directory paths.  So, if we probe `PLATFORM_RESOURCE_ROOTS` first, some files in those paths may unintentionally override the ones found in the bundle.

So, I've written the logic as:
• If a bundled assembly is overridden by a servicing location, exclude it from the `bundle_probe` listing
• Probe in the bundle first, followed by `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` / `PLATFORM_RESOURCE_ROOTS`  as applicable.

* For F5 debugging on VS and VS-Core: `mscordbi.dll`, `libmscordbi.so`
* For Linux mini-dumps: `createdump`, `libmscordaccore.so` 
* For ETW / LTTng: `clretwrc.dll`, `libcoreclrtraceptprovider.so` 
* For exception stack trace source information, error string resources on Windows: `Microsoft.DiaSymReader.Native.amd64.dll`, `mscorrc.debug.dll`, `mscorrc.dll`

When targeting `win7` platform, several additional DLLs are necessary (`api-*.dll`) to handle API compatibility. These files must be alongside the AppHost for the app to even start execution.
Therefore, we propose that targeting `win7-*` should not be supported when publishing apps as a single-file.

## The Runtime

### Dependency Resolution

The Host includes bundled assemblies as relative paths in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES`. When such a path is encountered, the runtime probes the bundle using the `bundle_probe` callback to obtain the location of the assembly within the single-file bundle. It then proceeds to memory-map and load the assembly as described [below](#PEImage-loader).

### PEImage loader

* IL assemblies are loaded directly from the bundle.

>     * The portion of the single-file bundle containing the required assembly is memory mapped, and the contents are appropriately interpreted by the runtime.

Reviewer: The entire bundle file can be quite large, and on 32-bit systems there might be not enough virtual address to do this. There should be a fallback.

Author: Sure @lpereira; I'll remove the comment about mappint the bundle -- which is an implementation detail.  We only need to map the headers at startup.

Reviewer 2: > 32-bit systems there might be not enough virtual address to do this

The bundle sizes large enough to hit this problem should be a explicit non-goal.

* ReadyToRun Assemblies
    * On Linux, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded directly from bundle. The various sections in the PE file are mapped at appropriate addresses, and offsets are fixed up.

>     * On MAC, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded similar to Linux. However, Mojave hardened runtime doesn't allow executable mappings of a file. Therefore, the contents of an assembly are read from the bundle into pre-allocated executable memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * On Mac, ReadyToRun assemblies are loaded similar to Linux. However, Mojave hardened runtime doesn't allow executable mappings of a file. Therefore, the contents of an assembly are read from the bundle into pre-allocated executable memory.
```

* The simple name of the assembly (with no path).
* The path of the assembly as if it were not to be packaged into the single-file.
* A special UNC notation such as `<bundle-path>/:/asm.dll` to denote files that come from the bundle. 
* A configurable selection of the above, etc.

Proposed solution is for `Assembly.Location` to return the empty-string for bundled assemblies, which is the default behavior for assemblies loaded from memory.

Most of the app development can be agnostic to whether the app is published as single-file or not. However, the parts of the app that deal with physical locations of files need to be aware of the single-file packaging. 

#### `AppContext.BaseDirectory`

`AppContext.BaseDirectory` will be the directory where the AppHost (the single-file bundle itself) resides. In contrast to [.NET Core 3.x single-file apps](design_3_0.md), .NET 5 single-file apps do not always self-extract on startup. Therefore, the details about extraction directory are not exposed through the `AppContext.BaseDirectory` API.  

> However, when single file apps are published with `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile` property set (which emulates .NET Core 3.x bundling behavior), `AppContext.BaseDirectory` returns the extraction directory, following  [.NET Core 3.x semantics](design_3_0.md#API-Impact).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, when single file apps are published with `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile` property set (which provides backward compatibility with .NET Core 3.x bundling behavior), `AppContext.BaseDirectory` returns the extraction directory, following  [.NET Core 3.x semantics](design_3_0.md#API-Impact).
```

Instead of "replicate" or "emulate", I think it is better say directly that this option is for .NET Core 3.x compat.

## Handling Content 

The app may want to access certain embedded content for reading, rather than loading via host/runtime. For example: bundled payload/data files. In this case, the recommended strategy is to embed the content files within appropriate managed assemblies as resources, and access them through [resource handling APIs](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.reflection.assembly.getmanifestresourceinfo?view=netcore-3.1). 

## Testing

* Unit Tests:
  * Apps using managed, ready-to-run, native code 
  * Framework-dependent and self-contained apps 
  * Apps with content explicitly annotated for inclusion/exclusion in the single-file bundle

>   * MSIL files with embedded PDBs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * CIL files with embedded PDBs 
```

* **HostPolicy**: Much of the bundle-processing is performed within HostPolicy.
  
  * If the app needs extraction, extracts out the appropriate files as explained in [this document](extractor.md).
  
  * Reads the `deps.json` file directly from the bundle and resolves dependencies.
  
  * Processes the Bundle manifest to maintain internal data-structures to locate bundled assemblies when probed by the runtime.
  
  * Implements a bundle-probe function, which will be used by the runtime to probe contents of the bundle when resolving assemblies. 
  
    ```C++
  /// <summary>
    /// <param name="path"> Relative-path to the file being probed. </param>
    /// <param name="size"> Out-param: size of the file, if found. </param>
    /// <param name="path"> Out-param: offset within the bundle, if found</param>
    /// <returns> true if the requested file is found in the bundle, 
    ///           false otherwise. </returns>
    /// </summary>
    bool bundle_probe(const char *path, int64_t *size, int64_t *offset);
    ```
    
  * The `bundle_probe` function pointer is passed to the runtime (encoded as a string) through a property named `BUNDLE_PROBE`.
  

>   * When probing for assemblies, the the [assembly resolution logic](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/4f9ae42d861fcb4be2fcd5d3d55d5f227d30e723/docs/design/features/assembly-conflict-resolution.md#probe-ordering) will treat bundled assemblies similar to assemblies in the app directory. The probe ordering will be in the order:  servicing location, shared store, framework directory(s) from higher to lower, the *single-file bundle*, app directory, additional locations specified in runtimeconfig.dev.json file.

Author: @vitek-karas  it is interesting whether the "App directory" should be a part of the default probing paths at all, for single-files. 

If the user chooses to not bundle certain assemblies, those files will be left beside the app in the publish directory. We'd like to be able to load these assemblies without having to set `additionalProbingPaths` 

However, the single file app may live in a directory with many other apps, assemblies and random files. The app shouldn't pick up a different assembly simply because it lies beside the app and has a later version.

Reviewer 3: The probing doesn't work that way. The algorithm goes in the order of probing paths and if it finds a match, it stops and returns. The host never opens the file (it only checks for existence), and so it doesn't read the file version (or assembly version).

There is some logic comparing versions, but it's solely based on versions written in `.deps.json` - and it only works to resolve conflicts between the app and the frameworks.

Reviewer 3: Also forgot to add: I do think we should probe the app's path for files which are left beside it (and for cases where the app uses plugins and such).
There's an interesting question what should happen for apps which are single-file and extracted. In that case the probing should probably look both in the extraction folder and in the app's .exe folder (in that order).

Author: Thanks for the clarification @vitek-karas, I forgot about this detail -- we'd talked about this issue.

* The simple name of the assembly (with no path).
* The path of the assembly as if it were not to be packaged into the single-file.
* A special UNC notation such as `<bundle-path>/:/asm.dll` to denote files that come from the bundle. 
* A configurable selection of the above, etc.

Proposed solution is for `Assembly.Location` to return the empty-string for bundled assemblies, which is the default behavior for assemblies loaded from memory.

Most of the app development can be agnostic to whether the app is published as single-file or not. However, the parts of the app that deal with physical locations of files need to be aware of the single-file packaging. 

#### `AppContext.BaseDirectory`

`AppContext.BaseDirectory` will be the directory where the AppHost (the single-file bundle itself) resides.

This is a change from [.net core 3 semantics](design_3_0.md#API-Impact) for single-file apps, where `AppContext.BaseDirectory` returned the directory where the bundle-contents were extracted.  In .net 5, extraction is not performed by default. Therefore, the details about extraction directory are not exposed through the `AppContext.BaseDirectory` API.  

> However, if files not handled by the runtime are bundled into the single-file (due to `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile` property which emulates .net core 3 bundling behavior)  the app will need a (new) API to locate the extraction directory.

Reviewer 2: Since `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile` is meant to replicate .NET Core 3 behavior, another option is to keep the .NET Core 3 behavior where BaseDirectory was modified to point to the extract location.

Note that even if you introduce a new API, it may not be easy for the apps to switch to it: The API may be called in the libraries that the app does not have a control over, etc.

Author: I thought about this; but it may be very confusing if the `AppContext.BaseDirectory` changes semantics based on this build property. 

The meaning of `AppContext.BaseDirectory`  is already different based on the TFM. 
An app will likely be built as a single-file using `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile` or not, but not both ways. So, it can handle the correct meaning of `AppContext.BaseDirectory` in its own code. 

However, if a dependent DLL checks for `AppContext.BaseDirectory`, it may interpret the meaning according to `AppContext.TargetFrameworkName`.  But if the directory is different based on the build flags, it will be more confusing.

Reviewer 2: `AppContext.BaseDirectory` differs based on the host. Different hosts tend to configure it differently to make stuff work.

From the `AppContext.BaseDirectory` docs: "Gets the base directory that the assembly resolver uses to probe for assemblies.". It is an oversimplification because the assembly resolver uses multiple directories frequently. So you pick the one that is most likely going to stuff work.

> `IncludeAllContentInSingleFile`

If we going to have this option, I think we should look at it as .NET Core 3 single file compatibility option, with all that comes with it.

Author: Thanks for the clarification @jkotas. I have updated the proposal now.

All other files, including platform-specific native binaries and symbol files, are left alongside the app by default. However, the set of files left unbundled alongside the app is expected to be small, such as: data-files (ex: `appsettings.json`) and custom native binary dependencies of the application. Further details regarding the files left next to the app is discussed in the [Host build](#Host-Builds) section. 

### Optional Settings

The following settings can be used to package additional files into the single-file app. However, when using these options, the files that cannot be processed directly from the bundle will be extracted out to disk during startup. 

| Property                             | Behavior when set to `true`                                  |
| ------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `IncludeNativeLibrariesInSingleFile` | Bundle published native binaries into the single-file app.   |

> | `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile`         | Bundle the `.pdb` file(s) into the single file app. This option is provided for compatibility with .NET 3 single-file mode. The recommended alternative is to generate assemblies with embed portable PDBs. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `IncludeSymbolsInSingleFile`         | Bundle the `.pdb` file(s) into the single file app. This option is provided for compatibility with .NET 3 single-file mode. The recommended alternative is to generate assemblies with embedded portable PDBs (`<DebugType>embedded</DebugType>`). |
```

  
  * Implements a bundle-probe function, which will be used by the runtime to probe contents of the bundle when resolving assemblies. 
  
    ```C++

>   /// <summary>

Reviewer 3: Nit: indentation

    /// <param name="path"> Relative-path to the file being probed. </param>
    /// <param name="size"> Out-param: size of the file, if found. </param>
    /// <param name="path"> Out-param: offset within the bundle, if found</param>
    /// <returns> true if the requested file is found in the bundle, 
    ///           false otherwise. </returns>
    /// </summary>
    bool bundle_probe(const char *path, int64_t *size, int64_t *offset);
    ```
    
  * The `bundle_probe` function pointer is passed to the runtime (encoded as a string) through a property named `BUNDLE_PROBE`.
  

>   * When probing for assemblies, the the [assembly resolution logic](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/4f9ae42d861fcb4be2fcd5d3d55d5f227d30e723/docs/design/features/assembly-conflict-resolution.md#probe-ordering) will treat bundled assemblies similar to assemblies in the app directory. The probe ordering will be in the order:  servicing location, shared store, framework directory(s) from higher to lower, the *single-file bundle*, app directory, additional locations specified in runtimeconfig.dev.json file.

Reviewer 3: I just updated the doc with the correct probe order (as is in the code): https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/master/docs/design/features/assembly-conflict-resolution.md. Please fix the text in this document to match (app goes before framework, bundle should go before app).

Nit: double `the` on the first line.

>   * The assemblies on disk are listed in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` using absolute paths. The assemblies to be loaded from the single-file bundle will be listed in `TRUSTED_PLATFORM_ASSEMBLIES` using relative paths (as a distinguishing convention). 

Reviewer 3: Please make it super clear to what the relative paths are "relative". I know it's a bit weird, but it's important. Not sure if we describe the fact that the bundle stores a directory structure and the paths are effectively relative to the bundle root. But we probably should. And maybe even mention how does that map to the app's layout when built without single-file.

Author: OK I'll add a note about recording relative-paths of file names in the meta-data of the bundle.

Actually, since the contents of the bundle always mask the contents of the app-directory, we need not actually store relative paths in the bundle. We could equivalently store absolute paths relative to the app-directory (which will be `AppContext.BaseDirectory`.  In the single-file prototype, this was a convenience, because many parts of the runtime don;t like to handle relative paths. 

However, writing relative paths in the TPA list makes the contents coming from the bundle evident for visual inspection.
